New metric instruments from OTEP 88 (#93)
open-telemetry/oteps: text/0093-metric-instruments.md

# List of new metric instruments

Formalize the new metric instruments proposed in [OTEP 88](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/88).

## Motivation

OTEP 88 introduced a framework for reasoning about new metric
instruments with various refinements and ended with a [sample
proposal](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/88#sample-proposal).
This proposal uses that proposal as a starting point.

## Explanation

The four instrument refinements discussed in OTEP 88 are:

* Sum-only: When computing only a sum is the instrument's primary purpose
* Non-negative: When negative values are invalid
* Precomputed-sum: When the application has computed a cumulative sum itself

> * Non-negative-rate: When a negative rate is invalid.

Reviewer: One question this OTEP doesn't answer: do we expect these refinements to show up in the API? Or is this just the set of refinements required for the extended instruments described in 88?

Author: I've added some text to clarify that users and exporters will not refer to these refinements directly.

OTEP 88 describes how we are meant to compute rate information from
instruments having the Non-negative-rate refinement.  Temporal
aggregation (over time) must be treated as a special case, compared
with spatial aggregation (over labels).  The logic for computing rates
depends on whether the Precomputed-sum refinement is present or not,
which determines whether Delta or Cumulative values are being
captured.

OTEP 88 proposes that when adding new instruments, we specify
instruments having a single purpose, each with a distinct set of
refinements, and each with a carefully selected name for the
properties of the instrument.

OTEP 88 also also proposes to support language-specific specialization
as well, to support built-in value types (e.g., timestamps).

## Internal details

The existing specification includes three instruments.  In this

> proposal, the two foundational instruments become abstract, in the

Reviewer 2: May make sense to iterate the once that exists for people to have a full picture. Maybe a table that includes all old + new?

sense that all synchronous instruments are instances of a Measure
instrument and all asynchronous instruments are instances of an
Observer instrument.  New instrument names are given to the

> unrestricted, unrefined versions of rthe foundational instruments:

Reviewer 2: s/rthe/the?

Author: :+1:

> unrestricted, unrefined versions of rthe foundational instruments:

Reviewer: It would help readability to make the instruments explicit here:

- Measure
  - Distribution
  - UpDownCounter
  - Timing
- Observer
  - CumulativeObserver
  - DeltaObserver

Author: Fixed, I hope.

> 1. **Distribution** is an an unrefined Measure instrument.  Distribution accepts positive or negative values and uses MinMaxSumCount aggregation by default.

Reviewer: As a naming nit: if the term `Measure` doesn't appear in the user-facing API I think it would be simpler to call this `Measure` and name the abstract type (which AFAICT is only used internally) to something like `AbstractMeasure`.

Author: The abstract Measure doesn't need a name, it's the concrete instrument without refinements we need to name. There was debate over this and I don't feel extremely good about either option right now. I like "Counter" because it sounds like a real kind of Instrument you'd use for counting--it's not a figurative word. "Observer" is a thing that observes, I'm happy with it too. 

"Gauge" was figurative, like "reading a gauge", except that the operation is to set something.  "Gauger" doesn't make sense, I feel it was not a good instrument name.

By these criteria, neither Distribution nor Measure is not a good name, they describe the thing the instrument produces, not the thing the instrument does. Perhaps `Recorder` is makes more sense?

This is at the very least making me want to remove "Measure" and "Observer" and refer to synchronous and asynchronous instruments everywhere.

Author: This topic is addressed in #96.

Author: I've added a note that the names in this document are not finalized.  See #96.

> 2. **LastValueObserver** is an unrefined Observer instrument.  LastValueObserver accepts positive or negative values and uses MinMaxSumCount aggregation by default.

Reviewer 2: I think this instrument tries to combine actually 2 instruments:
* "DistributionObserver" which accepts a `List<Value>` for every label combination where a MinMaxSumCount makes a lot of sense.
* "LastValueObserver" (GaugeObeserver) which accepts one value per label combination where a "Sum" makes more sense if we talk about merging labels - as an example memory-usage.

Otherwise is confusing to me how the "MinMaxSumCount" aggregation applies to one value reported.

I would suggest that we use "Sum" as default aggregation for this instrument, and add later a DistributionObserver if needed.

Author: I do not believe there should be a DistributionObserver. If you want to record a list of values, please use a synchronous instrument.

MinMaxSumCount is a good aggregator for LastValue because it includes the Sum but also characterizes the distribution w/ min/max and average. If you wanted only a Sum aggregation, why not use a DeltaObserver?

MinMaxSumCount is redundant when it includes only a single value, but when pre-aggregating LastValueObserver values you'll get both a distribution and a sum. Exporters that only want to export a sum can do so, the MMSC is cheap enough not to worry about this, I think.

Author: This topic is addressed in #96.

Author: I've added a note that the names in this document are not finalized.  See #96.

The existing Counter instrument is unchanged in this proposal.  It has
Sum-only and Non-negative refinements, which imply the
Non-negative-rate refinement.  Counter uses Sum aggregation by default

Two new synchronous instruments are introduced in this proposal.

> 1. **UpDownCounter** is a Sum-only instrument with no other refinements.  It supports capturing positive and negative changes to a sum (deltas).  UpDownCounter uses Sum aggregation by default.

Reviewer: Do we still need to call this `UpDown` if there's no `Counter` instrument to distinguish it from?

Author: There is still a Counter! This document was trying to describe new instrument names, and that's the only one that survived. I've made this clearer.

> 2. **Timing** is a Non-negative instrument specialized for the native timestamp of the platform.  It ensures that values are always reported in conventional units (milliseconds).

Reviewer 3: Is it worth calling out float vs integer on this one? 
Is the idea that OTel will say "this is the timing instrument, it will always measure times in milliseconds", or would the units be customizable by instrumentation?

Reviewer 2: Personally I would do ns because that is usually the unit for the monotonic time available in couple of languages like Java, go. If we go with millis then is definitely a float :)

Reviewer 3: for sure. I'm mostly wondering if we're planning on building that in to the instrument refinement. I think it's worth calling out, either way.

Reviewer: It's surprising to see restrictions on the type (int/float) and unit (ns/ms) here when the refinements above don't mention either. I think it's fine for the spec to describe conventions for instruments, but this does suggest there are more refinements in practice than are described in this OTEP.

> 2. **Timing** is a Non-negative instrument specialized for the native timestamp of the platform.  It ensures that values are always reported in conventional units (milliseconds).

Reviewer: Not `Timer`?

Author: I think `Timer` implies that the instrument _does the timing_. This is meant to convey it's useful for recording a timing. But as noted below, I'm starting to doubt the naming scheme. Could we call this `TimingRecorder`?

Author: This topic is addressed in #96.

Author: I've added a note that the names in this document are not finalized.  See #96.

4. **UpDownDeltaObserver** would be an asynchronous instrument for reporting positive and negative deltas to a sum.
5. **UpDownCumulativeObserver** would be an asynchronous instrument for reporting a cumulative sum without a Non-negative-rate refinement.
6. **AbsoluteLastValueObserver** would be an asynchronous instrument for reporting non-negative values.

These could be standardized in the future if there is sufficient
demand.  Although not standard, the behavior of each of these
instruments can be obtained by configuring one of the standard
instruments with non-standard aggregation.  We will wait and see.

## Trade-offs and mitigations

There are known limitations caused by not standardizing all possible
instrument refinements.  Creating too many instruments will create
confusion of its own, so we choose to limit the set of standard
instruments.  It is possible that SDK support for configuring
alternate aggregations will avoid the need for more standard
instruments.

There are potential incompatibilities related to the input range of
existing exporters and the new instruments.  For example, a Prometheus

> Histogram is used to capture distribution with non-negative values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Histogram is used to capture a distribution with non-negative values.
```

instrument names are given to the unrestricted, unrefined versions of
the foundational instruments.  The following table summarizes this
proposal:

| Existing name | Proposed name | Sync or Async | Refinements |
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- | ----------- |
| Counter       | Counter       | Sync          | Sum-only, Non-negative, Non-negative-rate |
| Measure       | Distribution  | Sync          | _None_  |
|               | UpDownCounter | Sync          | Sum-only |
|               | Timing        | Sync          | Non-negative, correct Duration units  |
| Observer      | LastValueObserver | Async     | _None_ |
|               | DeltaObserver | Async         | Sum-only, Non-negative, Non-negative-rate |
|               | CumulativeObserver | Async    | Sum-only, Precomputed-sum, Non-negative-rate |

### Synchronous instruments

Two new synchronous instruments are introduced in this proposal, bringing the total to four.

1. **Counter** remains unchanged.  It uses Sum aggregation by default.
2. **Distribution** is an an unrefined Measure instrument.  Distribution accepts positive or negative values and uses MinMaxSumCount aggregation by default.

> 3. **UpDownCounter** is a Sum-only instrument with no other refinements.  It supports capturing positive and negative changes to a sum (deltas).  UpDownCounter uses Sum aggregation by default.

Reviewer 4: How come `UpDownCounter` cannot be treated as a refinement to a `Counter`?

Author: Counter has non-negative, which implies Rate support.  We think that's the proper default behavior, so `UpDownCounter` is actually less refined than `Counter`.

Reviewer 4: `Non-negative-rate` is the refinement that defines rate support correct? Can there be a refinement like `up-down-rate` to `Counter` that would essentially be what `UpDownCounter` is capturing? Unless if I'm missing something.

Author: For a delta-oriented sum-only instrument, `non-negative` implies `non-negative rate`. I think of the `UpDownCounter` as lacking this `non-negative` refinement, thus lacking the `non-negative-rate` refinement, leaving it with only the `sum-only` refinement. 

Maybe we should be talking about a "property" of the instrument, which is not so much a refinement but a choice for sum-only instruments. Either they have the "delta" property or the "cumulative" property. `UpDownCounter` and `Counter` both have the "delta" property, as does `DeltaObserver`.  I think this "delta" property implies the `up-down-rate` you're asking about, but I don't see it as a refinement so much as a lack of the `non-negative` refinement.

(I'm not sure I'm helping...)

Author: I added a paragraph and a column to the table, hoping to explain how measurements are categorized as Delta, Cumulative, or Instantaneous based on which refinements are present. https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/93/files#diff-998af0c6471c96e97ea74443a922ed92R59

# List of new metric instruments

Formalize the new metric instruments proposed in [OTEP 88](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/88).

## Motivation

OTEP 88 introduced a framework for reasoning about new metric

> instruments with various refinements and ended with a [sample
> proposal](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/88#sample-proposal).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instruments with various refinements and ended with a [sample
proposal](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/blob/master/text/0088-metric-instrument-optional-refinements.md#sample-proposal).

```

This proposal uses that proposal as a starting point.

Note that this proposal is meant to establish the set of standard
instruments in terms of their refinements.  This proposal raised
several open questions about naming and default aggregations that were
best addressed in a separate OTEP.  See [OTEP
96](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/96) and consider the
names used in this proposal to be provisional--OTEP 96 proposes a
final naming scheme with greater consistency.

## Explanation

> The four instrument refinements discussed in OTEP 88 are:

Reviewer 5: It seems like this document has identified 2 different categories of refinements:

- Restrictions on the input values (non-negative, precomputed-sum, and non-negative-rate). This is a refinement that acts as a contract between the instrumenter and the exporter. The former agrees to only send a type of data the latter agrees to handle/interpret the data as such.
   I imagine the unit refinement (i.e. the `Timer` related restriction) to fit in here as well, right?
- Restrictions on meaningful aggregations (sum-only). This is a refinement limiting what processing make sense to be done on the data (though I imagine you could define a view that would go against this?).

Are there any other that people see?

Did we want to explicitly include these categories in this OTEP?

> * Sum-only: When computing only a sum is the instrument's primary purpose

Reviewer 5: For consistency, should this explicitly say that only a sum aggregation is to be used for instruments of this kind of refinement.

| Counter       | Counter       | Sync          | Sum-only, Non-negative, Non-negative-rate | Delta |
|               | UpDownCounter | Sync          | Sum-only | Delta |
| Measure       | Distribution  | Sync          | _None_  | Instantaneous |
|               | Timing        | Sync          | Non-negative, correct Duration units  | Instantaneous |
| Observer      | LastValueObserver | Async     | _None_ | Instantaneous |
|               | DeltaObserver | Async         | Sum-only, Non-negative, Non-negative-rate | Delta |
|               | CumulativeObserver | Async    | Sum-only, Precomputed-sum, Non-negative-rate | Cumulative |

### Synchronous instruments

Two new synchronous instruments are introduced in this proposal, bringing the total to four.

1. **Counter** remains unchanged.  It uses Sum aggregation by default.
2. **Distribution** is an an unrefined Measure instrument.  Distribution accepts positive or negative values and uses MinMaxSumCount aggregation by default.
3. **UpDownCounter** is a Sum-only instrument with no other refinements.  It supports capturing positive and negative changes to a sum (deltas).  UpDownCounter uses Sum aggregation by default.

> 4. **Timing** is a Non-negative instrument specialized for the native clock duration measured on the platform.  It ensures that duration values are always captured with correct units, that ensures exporters can convert duration measurements correctly.

Reviewer 5: I 100% think we should include this as an instrument, but having a unit based refinement wasn't specified at the start of the OTEP. Can we add something there about this?
